Fallacies are both plausible and logical, with something missing. 
results in political support, bad results.

Fair, social jusice, equality: appealing for politicians.

REALITY: In other words, evidence is too dangerous— politically, financially and psychologically— for some people to
allow it to become a threat to their interests

In short, reducing the set of mutually acceptable terms tends to reduce the set of
mutually acceptable results.

EXAMPLES: Rent control, gov policies that promote employee benefits.

FALLACY OF COMPOSITION - what is true of a part is true of the whole.

Whole neighborhoods have been demolished and "redeveloped" with upscale housing and shopping malls as
a means of "revitalizing" the community. Often the federal government subsidizes this operation.
Rich people have to be transferred somewhere, as well as displaced people.

Slums in front of Capitol in DC were moved, but turned other places into slums.

CHESS-PIECE FALLACY: 
Adam Smith: who "seems to imagine that he can arrange the different members of a great society with as much ease as
the hand arranges the different pieces upon a chess-board.

STRATEGY: If one policy doesn't work, then keep trying until one works; can cause people to change their behavior in ways
that adversely affect the economy.

No reliable framework for expectations, then that impacts investor and business sentiments.

OPEN-ENDED FALLACY: Resources are unlimited, who would be against health, safety, open space?

No matter how much is done to promote health, more could be done. No
matter how safe things have been made, they could be made safer. And no
matter how much open space there is, there could be still more.

Resources have alternative uses that could be more productive. 

Open ended demands encourage more gov. misallocation of resources.

URBAN FACTS AND FALLACIES:

The spreading out of urban communities in general has been made possible by reductions in transportation costs.

OVERPOPULATION FALLACY: Photographs of crowded slums in Third World countries may
insinuate the conclusion that "overpopulation" is the cause of poverty, when
in fact poverty is the reason for the crowding among people unable to afford
the transportation costs of commuting or much urban living space, but who
are yet unwilling to forego the benefits of urban living. 

CONGESTION: 

Fact: The annual costs in both wasted fuel and wasted time have been estimated at more than a thousand dollars per rush hour traveler in
Washington, Dallas, Adanta and San Francisco, and at more than $1,500 in Los Angeles

Stockholm and Singapore tried to charge people who drive different amounts. Traffic declined in numerous ways.
- showed that "free" roadways contribute to congestion, as most "free" things are used more extensively than when the
costs of people's behavior are conveyed to them direcdy through prices. 

- More roads wouldn't increase congestion.

AFFORDABLE HOUSING FALLACY: needs gov. intervention. Disproved time and time again.

Height restrictions are among the many building restrictions which can
be imposed. Moreover, if a community cannot expand upward, then it must expand
outward, leading to longer commutes to work.

Without restrictions: High profit margins, over and above the costs of
construction and land, attract more builders who wish to share in these
lucrative returns on investments in home building.

Affordable housing: this might be subsidized by taxpayers, or making it mandatory that private builders
sell a certain percentage of their housing at prices "below market".  

FACT: Moreover, where these prices represent losses to the builders,
these losses are made up by raising the prices of their other housing even
higher.

"Planning": government's suppression of other people's plans by superimposing on them a
collective plan, created by third parties, 

What held in check the ability of government officials to micro-manage housing markets
were property rights.

Consequences of no property rights: rich people can fence off their communities. 

Those existing residents who choose to sell to developers have just as much right
to do so under the Constitution as those who prefer to keep the community
as it is.

Land-use restrictions protecting "this way of life" have a cost paid by
others.

Parking lots and land prices....

FALLACY: Slums aren't all filled with criminals. Slums needed to be demolished since they are dirty. 
It appeared on the national level as far back as the administration of Herbert Hoover and was
developed further during the subsequent New Deal administration of
Franklin D. Roosevelt.

Eminent Domain: gov supposed to pay proper money to people whose properties they seize. 
Appraisers have conflict of interest: based on their appraisal, gov may have to pay more or less.
Gov wants to "redevelop" a given area means that the market value of properties in that area will fall

More fundamentally, however, what the government compensates for is
the value of what they take, not the value of what the property owner has
lost.

Logic: what's being built is more valuable then what's torn down, then should be possible to compensate losers for their losses and still
have left over. 

People who exercise eminent domain have incentives to exercise their authority far beyond the point where is a benefit. 
changing people's location does not change their behavior

Urban Sprawl Fallacy: The underlying basis for the criticisms rests on a
presumption of better aesthetic taste on the part of third party observers, as
compared to the taste of ground-level inhabitants.

FACT: The American government in fact pays farmers 50 Economie Facts and Fallacies
billions of dollars to take farm land out of production, in order to try to keep
agricultural surpluses from being even larger and more costly than they are.

FALLACY: It is often assumed that suburbanization means an increased use of
automobiles and therefore an increased use of fuels, resulting in an increased
pollution of the air.

While some jobs can move out of the city with the people, some other jobs cannot. Firemen, policemen, etc.
and so must commute from whatever distance is required for them to find housing that they can afford.

---------MALE AND FEMALE FALLACIES----------

Moreover, these differences have changed over time, so that a lessening of income disparities between
the sexes cannot be automatically attributed to a lessening of employer
discrimination.

Differences between women and men in physical strength

Mom's have domestic responsibilities, so incomes tend to lag behind men.

When women representation in higher level occupations and in the postgraduate education
required for such occupations was higher than in the 1950s, median age of marriage was higher.

As the median age of marriage began to decline, the
representation of women in high-level occupations and among recipients of
postgraduate degrees also declined

Evidence: In 1950, 94 percent of men but only 33 percent of women were in the labor force. This gap of 61 percentage points
narrowed to 45 percentage points by 1970. At the end of the century, the
gap was only 12 percentage points, as 86 percent of men and 74 percent of
women were in the labor force. 

However, even if we were to find zero economic differences between those women and men who were truly comparable, that
would not mean that women and men as a whole had the same income or
the same likelihood of being hired or promoted.

Families didn't want females working outside, since they could get in trouble, businesses thought otherwise.
Thus whole occupations could be off-limits to women simply because it was mostly men who worked in those occupations.

Where an occupation is unionized and withdrawal from the workforce
means a loss of seniority, reducing the prospects of being promoted for women.

Stepping away for example in tech industry is risky due to quick changes in tech.

FACT: It has been estimated that a physicist loses half the value of his or her knowledge in four years, while a professor of English
would take more than a quarter of a century to lose half the value of the
knowledge with which he or she began that career.

Having it all vs doing it all.

A number of studies have shown that women are far less likely than men
to choose occupations that require very long hours.

In principle, family responsibilities can be divided equally between
husband and wife, father and mother. In practice, however, that has not
been the norm in most places and in most periods of history. 

In short, there are economic incentives both for and against
discrimination, and the net balance of their effects is an empirical question. 

Nor are single women and single men comparable, when "single" people
include people who have been married for years, and have then been
divorced. 

There have been, and continue to be, more women than men who are part-time workers

In general, it makes a difference whether the male-female income gap is
compiled on an annual basis, a monthly basis or as per-hour earnings.

GLASS CEILING FALLACY: older women whose job qualifications have been most affected by the accumulated differences in job
experience from that of men of similar ages.

Moreover, the spread of cases like that, settled by employers not able to afford the cost of fighting through the courts for years, would be
enough to convince many observers that sex discrimination was widespread

which measure the upper limit of the combined effect of employer discrimination plus whatever other factors have been overlooked
or not specified precisely.

many married women have chosen to allow their husbands' best job opportunities to determine where the couple will live,
In other words, the passage of time increased husbands' earnings more than
the wives' earnings, another indication suggesting wives' investments in their
husbands' earning capacity.

--------ACADEMIC FACTS AND FALLACIES------

Having an endowment means that an institution does not have to earn its way by the sale of goods or
services to a satisfied clientele.

The principle of faculty self-governance is therefore central to the
operation of an academic institution. 

In these areas outside their expertise, including areas in which there is no such thing as expertise, professors can simply
indulge their personal prejudices at no cost to themselves.

In reality, some professors at various colleges and universities have openly admitted to
selecting textbooks on the basis of bonuses paid to them by the publishers
of particular textbooks.

The concentration of classes within a narrow band of hours also means
that the college must build and maintain more classrooms than if the classes
were spread out from early morning through the end of the day.

If a course on history of movies can be used to satisfy a social science requirement, then a student can graduate
from a prestigious school ignorant of history and its implications.

state universities supported by taxpayers often claim to need more money in order
to educate students, when in fact research remains as much of a faculty
priority.

Grade inflation: hurts students long term, but makes professor's lives easier. Not doing so will show in teacher
evals, hurting their careers.

professors are able to confine the ideological spectrum to those views consonant with their own,

