Here intellectuals refers to an occupational category, people whose occupations deal primarily
with ideas—writers, academics, and the like.

Karl marx never administered a gulag, adam smith never ran a business

au courant - french word, aware of what's going on

it is critical to try to understand the patterns of their behavior and the incentives and constraints affecting those
patterns.

Butthe ultimate test of a deconstructionist’s ideas is whether other deconstructionists find those ideas
interesting, original, persuasive, elegant, or ingenious. There is no external test.

The great problem—and the great social danger—with purely internal criteria
is that they can easily become sealed off from feedback from the external world
of reality and remain circular in their methods of validation. 

In short, constraints which apply to people in most other fields do not apply
even approximately equally to intellectuals.

Many public intellectuals have been justly
renowned within their respective fields but the point here is that many did not
stay within their respective fields.

Many major economic decisions are likewise crucially dependent on the
kinds of mundane knowledge that intellectuals might disdain to consider to be
knowledge in the sense in which they habitually use the word.

Titanic had best seaman in the world, but knowledge of icebergs (basic) doomed them

Why the transfer of decisions from those with personal experience and a
stake in the outcome to those with neither can be expected to lead to better
decisions is a question seldom asked, much less answered.

concentrate power is easier then concentrate knowledge.

It is common, for example, for the intelligentsia to deplore many methods of sorting and labeling
things and people, often saying in the case of people that “each person should be
judged as an individual.” The cost of the knowledge necessary to do that is
almost never considered. 

Virtually all adverse conclusions about any ethnic minority are likewise
dismissed as “prejudices,” “stereotypes” and the like by the intelligentsia.

Earl warren laughing at police chief in court when police said expanding criminal rights would undermine
law enforcement.  Yet here, as elsewhere, the first-hand observations and years of personal day-to-day experience—in this
case, by a retired police commissioner—were not merely dismissed but ridiculed
by people who relied instead on shared but unsubstantiated assumptions among
the elite. 

The intellectuals’ exaltation of “reason” often comes at the expense of
experience, allowing them to have sweeping confidence about things in which
they have little or no knowledge or experience.

*mundane knowledge held by general population

One-day-at-a-time-rationalism: risks restricting its analysis to the immediate implications of each
issue as it arises, missing wider implications of a decision that may have merit as
regards the issue immediately at hand, considered in isolation, but which can be
disastrous in terms of the ignored longer-term repercussions.

Ex: Hurricanes in Florida and wildfires in southern California are likewise
recurrent phenomena over the years but each individual natural catastrophe is
treated as an immediate and discrete crisis, bringing not only government rescue
efforts but also vast amounts of the taxpayers’ money to enable people who live
in these places to rebuild in the known path of these dangers.

statistical categories vs flesh and blood human beings

income distribution: assumes wealth exists somehow
The fact that one person’s productivity may be a thousand times as valuable as
another’s does not mean that one person’s merit is a thousand times as great as
another’s.

But only by assuming that everything that has not been done could have been
done, disregarding costs and risks, can individuals or societies be blamed
because the real world does not match some vision of an ideal society. 

Nothing is easier than simply assuming that things were better
before,

Any number of companies that have been said to “control” a majority of their
market have not only lost that market share but have gone bankrupt within a few
years of their supposed dominance of the market.

By saying that businesses have “power”
because they have “control” of their markets, this verbal virtuosity opens the
way to saying that government needs to exercise its “countervailing power”

government power is in fact power, since individuals do not
have a free choice as to whether or not to obey government laws and regulations, vs people who
have never went to walmart, and walmart can't do anything about it

The presumably key question whether Rockefeller’s pursuit of a larger fortune actually made the consuming
public worse off was seldom even addressed

There is little empirical evidence to suggest that the many government
interventions during the 1930s helped the economy and much evidence to
suggest that they made matters worse.m A 2004 study by economists in a leading
scholarly journal concluded that government policies prolonged the Great
Depression by several years.

—but as an anointed elite, people with a mission to lead others
in one way or another toward better lives.
In this vision, oppression, poverty, injustice and
war are all products of existing institutions—problems whose solutions require
changing those institutions, which in turn requires changing the ideas behind
those institutions.

But to be for “social justice” and “saving the environment,” or
to be “anti-war” is more than just a set of hypotheses about empirical facts. This
vision puts you on a higher moral plane 

At one time, Jews were in fact over-represented among Fascist leaders in Italy. Only after
Mussolini became Hitler’s junior partner in the Axis alliance of the late 1930s
were Jews purged from Italy’s Fascist party
In short, official and explicit government racist ideology and practice distinguished the Nazis from
other Fascist movements.

Communists served national interests despite whatever internationalist rhetoric they used 

Conservatism, in its original sense, has no specific ideological content at all,
since everything depends on what one is trying to conserve. 

Languages involved in a decentralized manner over many generations.

Thus the popular 1930s American radio
personality Father Coughlin—who was, among other things, an anti-Semite—
has been verbally banished to “the right,” even though he advocated so many of
the policies that became part of the New Deal that many Congressional
Democrats at one time publicly praised him and some progressives urged
President Franklin D. Roosevelt to make him a Cabinet member.

These arbitrary changes in classifications not only allowed the left to
distance themselves from embarrassing individuals and groups, whose
underlying assumptions and conclusions bore many similarities to their own,
these classification changes also allowed the left to verbally transfer these
embarrassments to their ideological opponents

The education of the young has long been a battleground between adherents of the two visions of the
nature of human beings and the nature of knowledge and wisdom.

Ambiguity is introduced by programs which confront students
with carefully crafted moral dilemmas

abstract people in an abstract world, whose
differences in outcomes could only be a result of external circumstances, has
been far more common among the intelligentsia.

In short, the question was expanded to the point where it could not be
answered (at the current state of knowledge), thereby making any answer seem
“simplistic.”

expanding the question to that of finding the “root causes” of
crime, a question that police action and punishment cannot answer.

the greater tendency of those with the
vision of the anointed to see those they disagree with as enemies who are
morally lacking. 

Similar concessions to the sincerity and
good intentions of opponents can be found in Milton Friedman and other
exponents of the constrained or tragic vision.

Left: everyone who opposes us are evil, while right say that sincerity and good intentions are leading to failure.

Ronald Reagan donated a higher percentage of his income to philanthropic
causes than did either Ted Kennedy or Franklin D. Roosevelt,

Higher tax rates: By the Treasury Department’s estimate, the money invested in tax-exempt
securities had nearly tripled in a decade

For and against opponents of tax rate reductions: the distribution of existing incomes and existing tax
liabilities versus (2) incentives to increase incomes by reducing tax rates, so as
to get individuals and institutions to take their money out of tax shelters and
invest it in the productive economy.


In reality, the national debt was reduced, as more revenue came into the
government under the lowered tax rates. The national debt was just under $24
billion in 1921 and it was reduced to under $18 billion in 1928.

The results
show how unreliable peer consensus can be, even when it is a peer consensus of
highly intellectual people,
if those people share a very similar vision of the
world and treat its conclusions as axioms rather than as hypotheses that need to
be checked against facts. 

JFK and Reagan tax cuts both increased tax revenues.

The real issue is why such things are regarded as obligations—the logical corollary of rights—upon other
people who have agreed to no such obligation to provide these things. If
someone has a right, someone else has an obligation. 

right to living wage is not based on obligation agreed to by employer

Again, “rights,” as the term is used ideologically, are ultimately assertions of
arbitrary authority by third parties to prescribe things that others have never
agreed to

On the contrary, the asserted “responsibilities” are the basis
for advocating the passing of such laws, even though the responsibilities have no
basis themselves, other than the fact that third parties want them imposed.

Nor are the asserted “rights,” “social
responsibilities,” or fictitious “contracts” or “promises” necessarily based on
claims of demonstrable majorities favoring such things.

1. Is life fair?
2. Is society fair?

1.  Life has seldom, if ever, been fair or even close to fair. The family or culture into which one is born can affect the
direction one’s life takes, as can the happenstance of the individuals encountered
in the journey through life, who may influence one’s outlook and aspirations, for
good or ill.

2. To answer that question requires, at a minimum, recognizing that
factors internal to individuals and groups cannot be disregarded

Moreover, the extent to which these
differences in life chances can be mitigated by such things as widespread access
to education or the alleviation of grinding poverty is a question, rather than a
foregone conclusion.

Question or conclusion??

Cosmic justice: extending beyond society’s rules and practices, —and are by no means necessarily correctable by social institutions or
social policies.

Those with the vision of the anointed proceed on the assumption that
surrogate decision-makers can directly prescribe and create socially desirable
results,

those with the tragic vision regard that as beyond any human
being’s capabilities, which can at best create social processes

social processes.....

life chances are equal is to ask a different question from whether a institution or society treats
individuals equally or fairly. 

Yet when intellectuals refer to eras of “change,” they almost never
mention the 1920s—

It is not uncommon among the
intelligentsia to consider it “selfish” if you object to others taxing away what you
have earned, but it is not considered selfish for politicians to want to tax away
any amount of the earnings, not only of contemporaries, but also of generations
yet unborn, to whom the national debt will be passed on.

Such responses and non-responses by intellectuals not only represent attitudes
rather than principles, often they represent attitudes that over-ride principles

Publishers such as McGraw-Hill, for example, have percentage guidelines as to how many of the
people shown in photographs in their textbooks have to be black, white,
Hispanic and disabled.

Supressing facts, ex. the soviet famines

Statistical data can also be filtered, whether by omitting data that go counter to
the desired conclusion (such as data on Asian Americans) or by restricting the
release of data to only those researchers whose position on the issue at hand is in
accord with that of those who control the data.

Gun control leads to lower death rates

Questions to be asked: 

1. Since we know that murder rates are lower in some countries with
stronger gun control laws than in the United States, are there other countries
with stronger gun control laws than the United States that have higher
murder rates?
2. Are there countries with widespread gun ownership which have
lower murder rates than some other countries with lower gun ownership
rates?
3. Did the murder rate differential between the United States and
Britain originate with the onset of gun control laws?

Inverse correlation....

Hoover bought food for people starving in europe during ww1
donated a lot of his own money
hoover almost became democrats nominee for president with fdr as vp

by former members of Roosevelt’s own administration, who acknowledged
that much—if not most—of the New Deal was simply a further extension of
initiatives already taken by President Hoover

Fictitious positive images can of course also be created, not only by
propaganda agencies in totalitarian countries but also by the intelligentsia in
democratic countries.

Glorify people like Adlai Stevenson:  Yet Stevenson “could go quite happily for months or years without
picking up a book, according to noted historian Michael Beschloss, among
others who reported Stevenson’s disinterest in books

Not only individuals, but whole nations, can be given fictitious characteristics
in furtherance of a prevailing vision.

During the era of slavery, India was estimated to have more slaves than the
entire Western Hemisphere

Thus “bums” has been replaced by “the homeless,” “swamps” by “wetlands,” and “prostitutes” by “sex
workers,” for example.

But “wetlands” are spoken of in hushed and reverential tones, as
one might speak of shrines.

When the Great Depression of the 1930s again brought to power people with the government
intervention philosophy—many of whom had served in the Progressive
Woodrow Wilson administration—they now changed their name to “liberals,”
escaping the connotations of their earlier incarnation, much as people escape
their financial debts through bankruptcy.

Much of what is said to be socially
“constructed” has been in fact socially evolved over the generations and socially
validated by experience. Much of what many among the intelligentsia propose to
replace it with is in fact constructed—that is, created deliberately at a given time
and place—and with no validation beyond the consensus of like-minded peers.

The specific image of a lion that you see in a cage may be a construct inside
your brain, but entering that cage will quickly and catastrophically demonstrate
that there is a reality beyond the control of your brain

“Who am I to say?” or “Who are we to say?” sound like self-denying expressions of generosity toward other
people’s choices. In practice, they can be denials of consequences—a sort of
tactical agnosticism to finesse unwelcome facts

Non-judgmentalism is one of the most dangerous of all the arguments
without arguments, for no reason is given for being non-judgmental, unless
endless repetition or peer consensus are considered to be reasons

people apologize to novelists for misunderstanding rather then blame his failiure to convey his misunderstanding
That vision requires villains, whether individuals or groups
or a whole society permeated by wrong ideas that can be corrected by those with
right ideas. 

The fatal misstep of many among the intelligentsia is in
generalizing from their mastery of a certain kind of knowledge to a general
wisdom in the affairs of the world

It almost doesn’t matter what policy you believe in, if you believe in it
categorically, because almost any policy can be pushed to the point where it
becomes counterproductive

Political, and especially legal, institutions tend toward categorical
decisions while families and markets tend toward incremental trade-offs because
of an unwillingness to sacrifice completely either love or wealth, for example. It
is completely consistent with the vision of the anointed that they wish to have so
many decisions made categorically as “rights.”

In literature or psychology as well, it is the
exceptional subject or the exceptional theory that gives importance to the
practitioner or to the field itself.

There need be no claim of originality or superiority to other doctors in order to receive both the
material and moral rewards of the profession

Only the new, the exceptional, or the dramatic, puts the practitioner or the field on the
map, as far as public recognition is concerned. 

historically, the growth of the economic pie, as it were, has done far
more to reduce poverty than changing the relative sizes of the slices going to
different segments of the population.

intellectuals “cannot operate at room temperature”

The Constitution of the United States explicitly forbids ex post facto laws,
1 so that citizens cannot be
punished or held liable for actions which were not illegal when those actions
took place

But judges making decisions on the basis of their own conceptions of
fairness, compassion or social justice are, in effect, creating laws after the fact,
which those subject to such laws could not have known in advance.

With this, Theodore Roosevelt verbally transformed himself into “the people”
and transformed the Constitution into an optional or advisory document,
defeating the whole purpose of having a Constitution as a check on the powers
of government officials. 

Theodore Roosevelt pledged to make “the people themselves” the “ultimate
makers of their own constitution.” Since the millions of people themselves
obviously cannot remake the Constitution, this leaves the President again in the
role of “the people”—which means that constitutional limits on Presidential
power are only whatever the President chooses to acknowledge.

“When the Constitution was framed there were no railways, there was
no telegraph, there was no telephone,”; made no attempt whatever to show
how these or other changes specifically required courts to reach new and
different interpretations of the Constitution

Merely repeating the mantra of “change” offers no reason why judges specifically are the ones to
make the changes.

If the Constitution is not amended very
often, that in itself is no evidence of a serious difficulty in amending the
Constitution. 

The crucial question here, as in so many other decision-making processes is
not what to decide but who is to decide. In this case, who is to decide if some
situation has “broken down” and that “inaction” would produce “disasters”?

Why is a third party able to supersede that decision?
beyond that of applying laws created by others, to themselves remaking
the law to “fit the times

“Judicial activism” is an idiomatic expression whose meaning cannot be
determined by the separate meanings of its words, any more than the meaning of
the exclamation “Hot dog!” can be determined by referring to a separate
definition of “hot” and “dog.”

But if Congress can determine the extent of its own powers under the Fourteenth
Amendment, or under any other provision of the Constitution, then the
Constitution becomes meaningless as a limit on Congressional power or on
government power in general. 

Looking at laws in terms of the subjective intentions of those who wrote them
is not only a more complicated approach, it is an approach that seeks or claims to
discern the value judgments or the “spirit” behind the laws.

Property rights

Economists have seen property rights as essential to (1) keeping economic
decision-making in the hands of private individuals—that is, out of the hands of
politicians, and (2) maintaining incentives for private individuals to invest time,
talents and resources, in the expectation of being able to reap and retain the
rewards of their efforts.

As if to make a complete mockery of the “root causes” theory, the ghetto riots that swept across
American cities in the 1960s were less common in Southern cities.

Even the most blatant facts can be sidestepped by saying that the causes of
crime are too “complex” to be covered by a “simplistic” explanation.

But no one has to master the complexities of Newton’s law of gravity to know that stepping
off the roof of a skyscraper will have consequences. 

In the United States, the cost of incarcerating a criminal has been estimated as
being at least $10,000 a year less than the cost of turning him loose in society

Empirically, the question
whether or not cultures are equal becomes: Equal in what demonstrable way?

The fact that the Victorian era was one of a
decades-long decline in alcoholism, crime and social pathology in general

Indeed, the complete absence of any national interest in a particular intervention has often been treated
by intellectuals as exempting that intervention from the moral condemnation
applied to other cases of imperialism.

But it was the insistence by Woodrow Wilson on a right of
Americans to sail safely into blockaded ports during wartime which created the
setting for these tragedies.

In a later time, Adolf Hitler would say, “I have
to attain immortality, even if the whole German nation perishes in the process.

The so-called self-determination of peoples was in fact the determination of peoples’ fate by
foreigners, arrogating the role of surrogate decision-makers,

The very idea of having each “people” have their own homeland ignored both
history and demography, not to mention economics and military security

In 1926, prominent intellectuals from a number of countries signed an
internationally publicized petition calling for “some definite step toward
complete disarmament and the demilitarizing of the mind of civilized nations.

Pacifists of this era seemed not to think of other nations as prospective
enemies but of war itself as the enemy,

A key role in the spread of pacifism in France was played by the schools—
more specifically, by the French teachers’ unions, which began organized
campaigns in the 1920s, objecting to postwar textbooks favorably depicting the
French soldiers who had defended their country against German invaders in the
First World War.

heroic soldiers now verbally reduced to victims.

In the earliest days of the war, when German military forces were most heavily
concentrated on the eastern front, one of the generals under his command had
informed him that, if the French attacked, he did not have enough resources to
stop them for even one day

Another element in the pacifist case of the 1930s, in both France and Britain,
was that even a victory in war would make no real difference.

In democratic nations, neither academic nor media intellectuals are usually as concerned with scrutinizing the specifics of
disarmament agreements as they are with celebrating the symbolism of the
signing of such agreements and the “easing of international tensions” that they
bring, as if emotional catharsis will deflect governments bent on military
aggression.

Alarm the public about germany's rearmament in 1930s, would have been political suicide.

Even Hitler’s Mein Kampf, which spelled out his hostile intentions toward France, did not get
through to the intelligentsia or to the public because a French court stopped its
full translation, so that only expurgated versions were available to the few who
were interested.

Jews fleeing Germany to France were ostracized and led to higher anti semitism, based on the notion that Jews were trying to provoke a
war between France and Germany.

Treaty of Versailles restrictions lifted by intelligentsia, wanted germany to be like portugal 
and denmark, despite not it not acting that way, and having a far greater military capacity.

Their inaction in response to the German remilitarization of the Rhineland in 1936, and to both Germany’s
and Italy’s interventions into the Spanish civil war that same year, followed by
the Western democracies’ inaction in response to Germany’s annexation of
Austria in 1938, all contributed to his contempt for Western leaders and his
confidence that they would do nothing more than talk

American cemeteries msgs vs european memorials: sacrifice, courage, and freedom; they assume somebody bad once started a
war to hurt the weak, only to fail when somebody better stopped them, vs
"stupidity" that caused men to fight each other.

During the war itself, American prisoner of war James Stockdale was told by his North Vietnamese captor, “Our country has no
capability to defeat you on the battlefield,” but that they expected to “win this
war on the streets of New York.

Churchill’s “iron curtain” speech, for example, evoked much adverse reaction
among the intelligentsia within both the United States and Britain.

But,like so much that has been said by the intelligentsia on so many subjects, the
notion that “war solves nothing” had less to do with any empirical evidence than
with its consonance with the vision of the anointed

US public opinion pressured gov to observe ceasefire, since south vietnam was dependent on US
military supplies, they also had to observe ceasefire. 

North vietnam didn't have any of these constraints, thus they won 

claim: people of all countries want peace, did the german opinion matter to hitler, did the soviet opinion
matter to stalin? It was as if war was a result of some insufficiency of empathy among peoples, or some mass
psychological malaise that could be treated therapeutically.

The fact that the Reagan approach, which many among the intelligentsia saw
as likely to lead to nuclear war, led instead to the end of the Cold War, while the
Chamberlain approach that was supposed to lead to peace led instead to the
biggest war in history, has made no dent on the vision of the anointed.

In other words, once the Soviets’ nuclear
missile buildup in Eastern Europe gave them military superiority in Europe, we
should freeze that superiority instead of restoring the balance. 

There were no suggestions as to how this remarkable feat might
be achieved, much less any discussion of the track record of attempts to undo
military conquests through diplomacy or boycotts.

A later (2009) Brookings Institution study of fatalities in 2007 among Iraqi
civilians—the main target of terrorist attacks—showed such fatalities to have
been an estimated 3,500 per month when predictions of failure for the surge
were made in January 2007.

Even actions detrimental to a country’s self-defense are not automatically unpatriotic in intention

In short, Europe and the world were on the brink of a catastrophic war
because neither friend nor foe believed that Britain and France had national
honor. 

Britain and France posing the issue in each case in terms of one-day-at-a-time rationalism, while Hitler posed
the issue explicitly in terms of “the national honour of a great people”
other words, a long run interest that he was willing to fight for

In other words, being militarily formidable may be enough to fight off an
aggressor, but showing yourself a formidable leader beforehand may be enough
to make it unnecessary to fight a war in the first place.

When one’s fate is clearly recognized as dependent on the surrounding national framework—
the institutions, traditions and norms of one’s country—then the preservation of
that framework cannot be a matter of indifference while each individual pursues
purely individual interests.

Patriotism is a recognition of a shared fate and the shared responsibilities that
come with it. National honor is a recognition that one-day-at-a-time rationalism
is a delusion

An alternative explanation of how people reach opposing views on
particular policy conclusions, or differences in their more general ideological
positions, is that they begin with different beliefs about the facts of the world
(including the nature of human beings) and/or a different analysis of causation.

When knowledge is conceived as all the information that has consequences in
the real world, then the distribution of that knowledge is radically different from
what it is when knowledge is conceived as the much narrower range of
information in which intellectuals specialize.

“In general, the market’ is smarter than the smartest of its individual participants
Certainly as public intellectuals, commenting on issues and events outside the
realm of their respective specialties, intellectuals have not always adhered to
intellectual standards, to put it mildly.

Yet the American public honors intellectual achievements in science,
engineering or the medical profession, among others—which is to say, fields
whose practitioners exhibit high intellectual ability but who are not intellectuals
in the occupational sense defined here.

But the intelligentsia have often simply
preempted that question by labeling military deterrence as an “arms race” and
disarmament advocates as a “peace movement”—in utter disregard of any
historical evidence that might be examined as to which approach has more often
produced which result.

filters deceive each other as well as the public. If there really was a coordinated conspiracy to deceive the public, then at least
the conspirators themselves would know what was true and what was false.

What does the phrase “glass ceiling” mean, except
that no visible evidence is necessary to support the conclusion that a dearth of
women above some occupational level is due to discrimination, rather than to
innumerable other factors that are involved?


