Hard to define race 

DEFINITION: Race is a social concept with a biological basis. 

Big question, how do we confront race?

Outcomes of intellectuals are subject to peer consensus.

Put US's racial/ethnic issues in an intl context. This
neither assumes nor denies the uniqueness of American racial and ethnic
issues, but lets that be an empirical question.

Take asian americans into considerations, whites are let go from jobs before asians.

Labels like Asian and Pacific Islanders are vague, have to go in more detail.

disparities often treated as oddities with no historial precedent.

Fact: Bank of Italy was set up to attract clients who were italian and were very good at repaying debts,
this bank became BofA.

Big Question: Was there ever any realistic chance that the various races would have had the
same skills, experience and general capabilities, even if they had the same
genetic potential and faced no discrimination?

geographic barriers: Western europe has geographic advantages compared to eastern europe.
Literacy moved from Western to eastern europe

— and neither could the people in those places have developed the same industrial
skills, habits and ways of life

Median Age differences mean differences in experience, knowledge

Irish immigrants arrived in the nineteenth century, and cholera outbreaks in
New York and Philadelphia went largely through Irish neighborhoods. People didn't want to live near Irish...

------CHANGING RACIAL BELIEFS--------

Correlation is not CAUSATION
genetic determinism is undermined.

WWI IQ test: showed white soldiers from Georgia, Arkansas, Kentucky, and Mississippi scoring lower on mental tests
than black soldiers from Ohio, Illinois, New York, and Pennsylvania.

Eugenics movement, attempt to prevent excessive breeding of wrong people.

RELATED: The Passing of the Great Race, written by birth control advocate, inspired Hitler
Author Madison Grant was ivy league educated and wealthy, and a progressive. 

FACT: Progressive sociologist Edward A. Ross, who coined the term “race
suicide” to describe the demographic replacement of the existing American
stock over time by immigrants with higher birthrates from Southern and
Eastern Europe

Francis Walker - proposed that immigrants pay $100 downpayment on entering country, He said that the restrictions he proposed “would not
prevent tens of thousands of thrifty Swedes, Norwegians, Germans, and men
of other nationalities coming hither at their own charges, since great numbers
of these people now bring more than that amount of money with them. 

Richard Ely, progressive: favored government and rejected free market economics.

Progressive economists advocated minimum wage laws, as a way of preventing “low-wage races” such as
Chinese immigrants from lowering the standard of living of American
workers. 

Harvard economist Taussig: those saturated with alcohol
or tainted with hereditary disease,” as well as “the irretrievable criminals and
tramps.”

Woodrow Wilson (president) showed KKK films in White House, gov segregated employees at his time.
Theodore Roosevelt had a very different view of potential of blacks then othe progressives: 

QUOTE: In response to a British historian who expressed a fear that the
black and yellow races would rise in the world to the point of challenging the
white race, Theodore Roosevelt said: “By that time the descendant of the
negro may be as intellectual as the Athenian.”

It is not necessary to believe that crime rates are genetically determined, but it is also not necessary to believe that it
was all just a matter of perceptions by whites.

FACT: the middle of the twentieth century, most of the Negro professionals in Washington, D.C. were
by all indications descendants of the antebellum “free persons of color

------INTERNAL RESPONSES TO DISPARITIES---------

In some countries today, any claim that intergroup differences in outcomes are results of intergroup differences
in skills, behavior or performance are dismissed by the intelligentsia as false
“perceptions,” “prejudices,” or “stereotypes,” or else are condemned as
“blaming the victim.

Intl examples: latvian educated class resented successful Germans and promoted unique latvian identity
Habsburg empire: germans were elite, and czechs were not. But a new Czech intelligentsia, including university students and
school teachers, promoted Czech cultural nationalism.

Germans resisted efforts initially to fragment society along ethnic lines, but were eventually forced to 
defend themselves, causing ethnic polarization (under social justice).

Similar polarization has been produced in other countries with the rise of a
newly educated intelligentsia— usually educated in “soft” fields

An international study of ethnic conflicts pointed out: “The very elites who
were thought to be leading their peoples away from ethnic affiliations were
commonly found to be in the forefront of ethnic conflict.

surplus academic proletariat which could not be absorbed into “economically or socially functional
employment” because they were trained primarily in law or the humanities

FACT: Historian A.J.P. Taylor has said that the first stage of nationalism “is led
by university professors” and that “the second stage comes when the pupils
of the professors get out into the world.

third world leaders went to west to study social theories, causing home countries to stagnate or even regress.

All this was part of the price paid for seeking cosmic justice for intertemporal abstractions, in a world where
maintaining peace and civility among flesh-and-blood contemporaries is
often a major challenge by itself.

Big Picture: disparity in wealth is a result, not a cause.
, like if Group A has higher incomes then group B, then its group B's fault...

intelligentsia downplays achievements by transforming it into "privilege"

LESSON: principles are less important then fashions

--------------RACE AND INTELLIGENCE-----------------

mental potential/native intelligence - IQ at birth

Could there be induced differences in average mental potential or average developed capabilities in a
given race?

QUESTION: magnitude and the duration of whatever differences in either intellectual
potential or developed capabilities that may exist as of a given time?

Claim: Tallest men sent to war and died, lowers average height of a country, and lowers potential for height of future
generations.

Some have said that Jews who survived thousands of years of persecutions had to be more ingenious, explaining
why a lot of jews are intellectuals

FACTS: Genes of less successful members of a particular race become a growing proportion of all the genes passed on to subsequent generations can
reduce the average hereditary potential of the race as a whole.

This is caused by: policies subsidizing such lifestyle, and internal culture of laziness.
Some groups may refuse to be dependents and escape consequences of this lifestyle

hereditary and environmental theories are not sealed off, since environment can influence survival rate of hereditary Characteristics
No real way to measure potential of individuals at moment of conception.

Welfare subsidizes more kids in low income families, affecting educational achievement.

When hiring: What has been the track record of a particular test in predicting subsequent
performances— both absolutely and in comparison with alternative criteria?

STUDY DONE ON IQ: A long-range study by Lewis Terman, beginning in 1921, followed children with IQs of 140 and above in their later lives and found that those
children who came from homes where the parents were less educated, and were from a lower socioeconomic level, did not achieve prominence in their
own lives as often as other children in the same IQ range who had the further
advantage of coming from homes with a higher cultural level.

Being mismatched to the particular university that has admitted them for diversity reasons.

Groups that score low on abstract questions in IQ tests.

FALLACY: group differences in scores on these tests are due primarily to the words used in these tests or to the
culturally loaded subjects in the questions. 

REFUTATION: these groups may not be interested in abstractions in their lives.
Also, what are the tests supposed to be for? These skills are needed in many careers in this world. 
A culture-free test might be appropriate in a culture-free society— but there are no such societies.

1st tie forced to accept 2nd tier, 2nd tier accept 3rd tier, domino effect. 

Not useful to single out a racial group's IQ for comparison with natl. avg, since it creates implication of uniqueness.

The fervor and persistence of the racial IQ debate cannot be assumed to be a measure of its practical implications,* as distinguished from its ideological
importance for competing social visions.

Black subculture has had negative effect on academic achievement. 
FALLACY: what is needed in educational institutions is some larger “critical mass” of black students, in order to make them feel socially
comfortable and thus able to do their best work academically.

FACT: In other words, highability minority youngsters do better in classes that are intellectually
homogeneous, rather than racially homogeneous.

FACT: That is the fact that females are several times as numerous as males among blacks with high IQs,

VOCAB: vituperation

------LIBERALISM AND MULTICULTURALISM--------

An American Dilemma, 1944 book, mentions that American racial policies, especially in
the South, marked a glaring contradiction between the nation’s fundamental
founding principles of freedom and equality and its actual practices as regards blacks

Premise that racial problem was one inside minds of whites, simplified task of intelligentsia

Progressives shifted from eugenics to racism. If minorities were
seen as the problem before, the majority was seen as the problem now.

No empical evidence: For example, the number of blacks lynched in the entire history of the United States would be a fraction of the Armenians
slaughtered by Turkish mobs in one year in the Ottoman Empire

Prevents understanding that internal or cultural values could have a role in racial disparities or gaps.

FOREIGN EVIDENCE: Writing about lower-class whites in British public housing projects, Dr. Theodore Dalrymple observed: “The public spaces and elevators
of all public housing blocks I know are so deeply impregnated with urine that
the odor is ineradicable. And anything smashable has been smashed.

FACT: 1967 poll found that 68 percent of blacks said that they had more to lose than
to gain from rioting

FACT: After the Rodney King riots in 1992, 58 percent of blacks condemned those riots, while only 32 percent found the violence even
partially justified.

Justification for racism: group that is to be discriminated against
was too proficient for others to compete with on equal terms, for whatever
reason

EXAMPLE: For example, most blacks were not residentially segregated in such cities as New York, Chicago,
Detroit, Philadelphia, and Washington by the end of the nineteenth century

a causal analysis of the major changes that occurred in residential and other restrictions on blacks cannot explain such
changes by simply saying “racism. 

