Chinese more advanced then any european in terms of discovery and stem fields
Greeks located closer to middle east, agriculture spread quicker to greece.

Therefore explanations of economic differences cannot be confined to factors peculiar to a particular time or place

People or nations may be rich / poor because they produced more/less, or they took more/less from others
Spain was very rich due to its empire, but it spent all of it recklessly - one of the poorest countries in europe today

Real income: money income adjusted for inflation, consists of goods and services produced in the nation
Cannot look at it from standpoint of those receiving all the money for those goods

production vs transfer of wealth.

Geographic determinism: places with more natural resources supposed to be richer. Japan???
Geographical factors are different based on interactions.
Geography is not egalitarian

Interactions between different factors are important!

Cultural universe: knowledge that is transferred, but people get to see how others are doing things, can break
centuries old habits nurtured through isolation.

There have been vast deposits of petroleum in the Middle East from time immemorial. But it was only after science and technology had
advanced to a level that created industrial nations elsewhere that the
Middle East’s oil became a valuable asset.

Not only does rainfall vary greatly from one place to another, so does the
ability of the soil to hold the water that rains down on it.

Ancient greek agriculture vs ancient britain

defining environment as what is around a given people and defining environment to include also what is within those people.
QUOTE: "We do not live in the past, but the past in us."

African coastline is shorter then european coastline

CHARACTERISTIC: In terms of the contours of the land, sub-Saharan Africa has been characterized
as “cursed with a mesa form which converts nearly every river into a
plunging torrent on its approach to the sea.”

CHARACTERISTIC: rainfall patterns in sub-Saharan Africa include long periods when there is no
rain at all, followed by torrential downpours during rainy seasons

Continuous miles of navigable rivers. 
Ex: Sometimes a canoe can go ashore and be emptied of its cargo before reaching a waterfall, with both the canoe and the
cargo then being carried around the waterfall, so that the reloaded canoe can proceed on another level stretch of water.

CHARACTERISTIC: A broad coastal plain, where the land nowhere reaches 1,000
feet above sea level, means that Western Europe has had slow-flowing
rivers, which were especially valuable

CHARACTERISTIC: Because the warming effect of the Gulf Stream on the climate of Western
Europe is lessened the farther east one goes, the waterways of Eastern
Europe are frozen more often, and longer, in the winters.

CHARACTERISTIC: Even when the rivers of Eastern Europe are flowing, often they are
flowing into lakes or inland seas, rather than out into the open seas that
connect with the rest of the world.

CHARACTERISTIC: Mississippi river has more water then Nile, and drops less inches per mile.

-----------> FISHING

Fishing villages represent a step upward from a hunter-gathering
society to a sedentary life. Fishing opportunities vary depending on land.

---------LAND AND CLIMATE----------

About 10 to 12 percent of the world’s population lives in mountains, about half in Asia
Mountain people suffer from poverty and backwardness. Mountain valleys are often isolated, 
Fertile soil are washed down.

technology cannot undo centuries of cultural isolation. Substandard infrastructure remains common in
mountains around the world, even in the twenty-first century

language moved slowly up from lowlands to highlands.
Law and order are harder to establish; common for highland people to raid and plunder the more prosperous people in lowlands.
People live shorter lives.
Children have to work at early age, preventing an education.
People from lowlands have disdain toward highland people due to cultural differences

Longer lasting migrations have included many mountain men who became mercenaries in various armies
Although mountains form rivers.

---------->soil
agriculture originated in Iraq. Tigris and Euphrates rivers washed nutrients over land.
In Asia, agriculture began on the Indian subcontinent, in the valley of the Indus river, in what is today Pakistan.

Moreover, the dryness of much of Africa inhibits the use of fertilizers to supply the nutrients missing in the
soil. Fertilizers used without adequate water can inhibit, rather than enhance, the growth of crops.

Wetlands in Africa contain tropical diseases. 

FACT: Even though the heat of sunlight is greatest in the tropics, nevertheless the sun shines more hours per day during the summer in
the temperate zones than in the tropics, allowing a longer daily buildup of heat.

Clouds interact with latitude, since clouds reflect sunlight. 

-------->Living in temperate vs tropics

This meant that peoples living where seasons changed drastically
had to develop a sense of urgency about time, and the discipline to
adjust to its requirements.

This required not only the discipline of saving, but also the conversion of
perishable foods like milk and fruit into storable foods like cheese and
jam.

--------->Animals

What was totally lacking throughout the Western Hemisphere when the Europeans arrived were
horses, oxen and other heavy-duty draft animals or heavy-duty beasts of
burden.

Wheels? The issue is not the intellectual capacity to invent the
wheel but the economic value of wheels in absense of animals.

Without beasts of burden, less cargo can be collected and dispersed inland, making ships less big as a result.

CHARACTERISTIC: Another of the cultural factors fragmenting the peoples in tropical
Africa is a multiplicity of languages, out of all proportion to the size
of the population.

None of the animals of Asia— the next nearest continent— was present in
Australia when the British arrived in the eighteenth century

Europeans decimated by Asian diseases, native americans decimated by european viruses...

------------> location

Japan located close to China allowed it to import ideas and advances before others.

During the era of European colonialism, location near Western institutions like schools gave those segments of the conquered people
50 Wealth, Poverty and Politics in such locations major advantages over their compatriots.

Ibos in Nigeria embraced western missionary schools while muslims in the north didn't; Ibos became much more successful.

Location of britain makes it less necessary for maintaining a big army.
Being located near enough to continental Europe to have ready access to the trade and technology of its
European neighbors allowed the British to gain the benefits of those continental nations that were for centuries more advanced than the
British.

--------------Cultural Factors------

Without the cultural prerequisites for developing natural resources into real wealth, the raw physical resources themselves are of little or
no value.

Marshall Plan to rebuild European physical capital was successful, but the same thing didn't happen in african countries.

Cultures include not only customs, values and attitudes, but also skills and talents that more directly affect economic
outcomes, and which economists call human capital.

--------> GERMANS: 

FACT: Nineteenth century Germany was one of the first European nations to have free
and compulsory education

An emphasis on education was a cultural pattern found in Germany itself, was also a part of foreign German communities

So that the general environments of those various other societies were not the controlling factor in these groups’ economic or other
outcomes in those societies.

--------> Overseas Chinese, Jews, Lebanese, Cubans

- little more than the clothes on their backs and a willingness to work as hard as it took for them to
get ahead. Often, in centuries past, these poverty-stricken emigrants
from China had little or no education and knew little of the language
or customs of the countries they went to. 

Laws designed to restrict Chinese. Macao indentured labor trade, killed many.

Jews: Their men usually began working as lowly peddlers on the streets, and
their women and children worked at home in “sweatshop” conditions, with sewing machines whirring for long hours in the tenements,
doing piecework on garments

Jews IQ tests were initially low, but after they acquired more knowledge, scores went up.

Lebanese: not very educated, and their initial economic rise came from success in business, typically
beginning at the lowest level, as peddlers.

Illiterate Lebanese immigrants in Mexico would often keep letters that they received from Lebanon for months until they could
find someone who could read these letters to them and then write their replies for them.

Lebanese Family enterprises, open 16 to 18 hours a day, with children stocking the shelves and making deliveries, and
with wives sometimes relieving their husbands in the store

RESULT: But Lebanese success in business later allowed them to give their children more education, including education at colleges and
universities.

Unable to take much of their physical wealth with them to America, and usually unable to
resume the same professions they had back in Cuba, since their educational or occupational credentials carried no weight in the
United States, these refugees found themselves suddenly at the bottom, economically.

Cubans became very successful.

----------------> Cultural Diffusion

Western countries adopting arabic numerals simply because they were better (voluntary decision).

CHARACTERISTIC: attempts to force changes in other people’s cultures have largely failed,
outsiders’ attempts to artificially prolong the longevity of a particular group’s cultural features, preserving them as if they were museum
pieces, can be a serious disservice,

- Difference sin receptivity is a big cultural difference
More important, Japan was culturally receptive to aspects of the
Chinese culture.

- Japan’s rise to an economic parity with the leading Western
nations over the next century was achieved by a mass importation of
Western technology and Western experts

- Scotland absorbed from English, and led in STEM fields.

- Arabs don't learn from the more advanced west anymore: Over a five-year period, a United
Nations study showed that the number of books translated in the
Arab world was less than one book for every million Arabs,

German being the working language in Eastern Europe opened barriers and minds.

Ex: Similarly, those rural villages in Eastern Europe that were largely
populated by German farmers were allowed by Eastern European rulers
to live under German law.

Often instead, politics promoted a sense of grievance against those
with a more successful culture.

Economic damage has been done by forcing productive minorities to flee.
Ex: Asians from Uganda in the 1970s, the expulsion of the Germans from Czechoslovakia after the Second World War,90 the
expulsion of the Moriscos from seventeenth century Spain

But it is quite rational, from the standpoint of the self-interest of leaders of lagging groups, to keep
the groups they lead resentful of more advanced groups.

Learning from other cultures is a clear threat to group leaders, who lose credibility and constituencies.

-----------------CULTURE AND PROGRESS---------------

What is tangible may make a stronger visible impression but it is by no means certain that its economic effect is greater than the
intangibles.

Trust without trustworthiness is a formula for disaster.

Soviet Union was very corrupt, bribes, embezzeled, despite having lots of natural resources.

-> A French observer in the early twentieth century referred to “the extraordinary waste— to be polite— that reigns
among Russian administrators.

Fact: tolkachi, whose sole purpose was to carry out illegal economic activities

$2 billion a year were paid in such outlays by Russian students and their parents to get into best universities.

If country's legal system is broken, then groups with trust within can economic decisions faster and with less risk 
Honesty is not evenly distributed.

Education is not the only human capital. Common sense and real world experience matters a lot too.
Fact: industrial revolution was in fact largely the work of people with
practical job skills and experience

Different cultures differ not only in the amount of education people seek, but also in what kinds of education they seek

By contrast, majority groups that are lagging economically tend also to lag educationally, both quantitatively and qualitatively. They 
study easier subjects, leading to worse careers.

People with useless degrees often become negative factors in economy and even sources of danger.

An international study of ethnic groups found “cultural revivals” to be a “response” reflecting “an awareness of the danger of a
fading group identity.”

newly educated groups, often lacking marketable skills, who have promoted
group polarization, whether in Europe, Asia or Africa.

Group pride: Quebec authorities even tried to force pilots to
communicate in French with air traffic controllers when landing or
taking off.

You won't earn more unless the skills you get from education produces more in terms of economic output.

government may create tons of jobs for people with useless skills in order for social stability, red tape
they generate are often an impediment to economic activity

---------Attitudes toward Work-----------

Many contemporaries of American antebellum Southern whites commented on the lack of a work ethic among them.

In 1860, the South had 40 percent of the dairy cows in the United
States but produced just 20 percent of the butter and only one percent
of the cheese.

Wealthy landowners in Britain were not content to be passive recipients of
rents, but actively promoted improvements in farming.

Sometimes the problem is not just an aversion to work, or to certain
kinds of work, but also a lack of drive for progress. 

--------SOCIAL FACTORS---------------

DEFINITION: include the size and demographic makeup of their populations and the human capital and
social mobility in their societies. Rising populations would create more poverty.

FALLACY: number of people would grow to exceed the number for which there was
adequate food.

Less stressful geographic setting may allow people to be lazy, despite its riches.

Malthus: “Population, when unchecked, increases in a geometrical ratio,” while subsistence
“increases only in an arithmetical ratio.” 

“By that law of our nature which makes food necessary to the life of
man, the effects of these two unequal powers must be kept equal."

TAKEAWAY: There is a limit doesn't mean that we are nearing it

But there is no consistent relationship between population density and either wealth or poverty. 

---> If median age is different, how would that not create disparity in economic outcomes?
People make more as they gain experience and human capital.

BIG IMPORTANT FACT: American children in families where the parents are in professional occupations hear 2,100 words an hour, on
average. Children whose parents are working class hear an average of 1,200 words an hour— and children whose family is on welfare hear 600
words an hour.

QUOTE: We cannot tell where the unfairness occurred by where the statistics were collected

--------MIGRATION--------

Patterns of migration from certain places and where they settle.
In general, people sort themselves out in all kinds of groups, within
races as well as between races, and in all sorts of countries around the
world.

--------Social mobility--------

Put differently, a nation which creates obstacles to the
use of the talents, potentialities is needlessly depriving itself of a source of greater prosperity

CLAIM: much concern was aroused in the early twenty-first century when
claims were made that social mobility had declined greatly in the
United States.

REFUTATION: This would affect the economic state of the country???
DEFINITION: A dictionary defines “mobile” as “anything that can be moved.

TAKEAWAY: if we take mobility to mean the freedom or option to move, then we have a different definition from
those who measure mobility by how many people have actually moved.
This depends also on behaviors of individual groups and people.

The vast majority of Americans have higher family incomes than their parents did
Immigrants able to move up social ladder, then it shows that mobility exists, 

---------MENTAL capabilities----------

Major differences between developed mental capabilities among racial or ethnic groups
Tests that show such differences are dismissed as “culturally biased” tests
and historical evidence of such differences is dismissed as
“stereotypes".

EVIDENCE: Mental tests given to American soldiers during the First World War likewise showed that whites from some Southern
states scored lower than blacks from some Northern states.

Predictive validity of mental test vs measuring real intelligence.
If what an IQ test measures correlated with person's career / academic performace, then it is valid. 
Supreme Court case: Griggs v. Duke Power Co

A privilege exists ex ante and is fundamentally different from an achievement,
which exists ex post.

Passionate advocacy of the interests of lagging minorities has seldom been followed by equally dedicated empirical investigation as
to whether those minorities have actually benefitted from advocacies.

MLK: “We can’t keep on blaming the white man. There are things
we must do for ourselves."

Despite rising numbers of black students admitted to the University of California at Berkeley during the 1980s, the number of
black students graduating actually declined.

The recurring theme in discussions of American immigration laws during that era was that
immigrants from Southern Europe were mentally inferior to those from Northern Europe

-----------POLITICAL FACTORS-------------

Whatever the geographic, cultural or other influences in a given society, they are all ultimately constrained by power, whether
governmental power or military power.

----EMERGENCE OF NATIONS---------

larger governing units usually mean more powerful army
Bigger political units also create bigger markets for products, encourage specialization of skills, strengthen economy.

Does not mean that such societies will emerge everywhere.

Reason 1: some societies are more in communication and interaction with other societies, with greater
frequency or over wider areas, build more understanding.

Reason 2: radius of trust. fragmented mountain populations, too many languages, etc..

More than a hundred years ago, mountainous Afghanistan was described as a region with “no sense of unity” among
its numerous tribes.

foreign conquest or by the threat of such conquest may temporarily form political alliances, but rarely last long term.
Incas and Switzerland.

Chinese is non phonetic, which means that can communicate through writing: From a political
standpoint, this can facilitate the consolidation of linguistically different peoples into a larger nation.

political consolidation has prevented international slave trade from flourishing, since it was now harder to raid for slaves.

One of the consequences of imperialism, whether ancient or modern, has been that an empire can combine
peoples into larger governmental units than the conquered peoples ever combined into themselves.

Romans withdrew from Britain, britain fell into ruins.
India and Pakistan, forcibly together until British rule, but ethnic differences caused violence after partition.

2 Few words have been repeated so often or so insistently as “diversity,” without a speck of evidence being offered or asked for to
substantiate its claims of economic or social benefits. 

If a group in a poor society is doing well, should be a chance for individuals in the rest of a society to
acquire some of this human capital themselves, whether by example, by working with or observing the more productive group,

RESULT: But politically, its dynamite.

In New York, Korean greengrocers have gone out to pick up their fruits and vegetables from
wholesalers at 4:00 AM, enabling them to select the best of these fruits and vegetables and to save on delivery charges that other
greengrocers had to pay.

political priority of protecting majority group egos has trumped the economic or other benefits of making use of the
best skills and talents available in the economy

Example: Romania kicked out Germans and Hungarians from universities, even though most Romanians couldn't read.
The expulsion of Asians from Uganda in the 1970s led to the collapse of the Ugandan economy

Ottomans to Armenians, Hutu, Tutsis in Rwanda. 

WHAT'S STRANGE: Yet it is also a puzzling and disturbing fact that some groups who
inflicted horrific atrocities on others had previously co-existed peacefully
for years, or even generations, 

A catalyst is needed to cause violence: In Sri Lanka, guy called Solomon Bandaranaike.
Most poor countries have human capital, but politics is a barrier.

Those seeking such leadership positions typicall offer 4 things: 

1.  Assurance that their lags are not their fault
2.  their lags are the fault of some advanced group that they already envy and resent.
3.  the lagging group and their culture are just as good as anybody else’s, if not better
4.  what the lagging group needs and deserves is a demographically defined “fair share

Leaders of lagging groups may have many things to complain about.

Even where the advanced group has behaved badly toward the lagging group, that is still not proof
that the lagging group would have been better off economically in the absence of the advanced group.

Example: Churchill said, "We owe London to Rome", since ancient Britain was very poor even before Rome conquest.

LESSON: Moral condemnation is not causal explanation.

---------->WELFARE STATE Vision

1. many people are mired in a degree of poverty that a prosperous society can and should relieve
2. many, if not most, of the people in poverty never had the same chance of a better life as others who ended up more prosperous. 

People living in poverty are living as result of catastrophic social problems.

Answers offered to blacks in America: group solidarity in pursuit of
collective political solutions and, in the meantime, resistance to the
cultures of those who are more fortunate.

Example: Germans rarely did politics but the ones who became prominent became spokesmen for the entire US, not just their
German american community. 

Irish Americans greatly involved in politics even as most of their communities still lagged behind economically. 

Black newspapers and black civic organizations like the Urban League tried to acculturate less
educated, lower-class blacks to the norms of the larger society in 20th century.

The retrogressions in educational achievement among blacks in parts of the United States, as well as the retrogressions represented by
family disintegration, rising drug addiction, violence and criminal
behavior, have been strikingly similar among lower-class whites in England.

American welfare state bureaucracies whose jobs, budgets and power are advanced by the
existence of a large dependent population

LESSON: Any reasonably well-informed American can name at least three or four black leaders of the past or present, but would find it hard
to name even a single comparable Asian or Jewish ethnic leader to whom these groups’ dramatic rises from poverty could be attributed.

But the situation at least serves as an illustration of the larger point that a
welfare state— like geographic, cultural, demographic and other factors— does not operate in a vacuum but interacts with other
factors.

------------------------IMPLICATIONS-----------------

"Paradox of poverty in affluent society"

1. preconception of an egalitarian world
2. a disregard of the arbitrary nature of the government-defined word “poverty.

It may suggest something about human beings in general that no given individuals, or even small societies, have been capable of reaching
the heights of human achievements, without access to the current and
previous achievements of vastly larger numbers of other people.

s. It is freedom for ordinary people that has been a peculiar institution, of relatively recent vintage as history is
measured.

LESSON: Income is a by product of production, not a discrete issue. 

Unfortunately, statistical surveys that follow specific individuals
over the years are more expensive than statistical surveys that simply
compile data over the years

Many conclusions that might make sense in a world of predestination do not make sense in a world of
individual choices. 

If income is redistributed in a way that reduces efficiency, which is what makes the distinction relevant, then the economic
losses of some as consumers are simply arbitrarily declared to be less important than the economic gains of others from “social justice.” But
what is an injustice, if not an undeserved cost of some sort inflicted on people?

Indeed, if any two things each have some value, one cannot be categorically more valuable than the other, as Rawls claims. A
diamond may be worth much more than a penny, but enough pennies will be worth more than any diamond. 

Right of low income people to prefer prosperous society.

One of the reasons for paying people for their productivity, rather
than their merits, is that productivity is far easier to determine than
merit

The United States has been, and is, unique in the extent to which private
philanthropy has created schools, libraries, scholarships, colleges,
foundations, hospitals and other civic institutions that are elsewhere
provided by government or by religious organizations.

Americans have very high social civic participation. 

When you want to help people, you tell them the truth. When you want to help yourself, you
tell them what they want to hear. 

The descendants of great conquering nations and peoples often have little to show economically from the historic feats of their
ancestors.

Argentina vs Barbados, example of difference in cultures. In the cities, as in the farmlands, Argentines were outperformed by
immigrants.

FACT: In the words of distinguished French historian Fernand Braudel, it was immigrants who “created modern Brazil, modern
Argentina, modern Chile

FACT: Centuries later, Paraguayans were bewildered by the unrelenting work of people in Japanese agricultural colonies in their country,94
and Honduran farmers complained that it was unfair for them to have to compete with German farmers in their country, since the latter
were considered to be working too hard.

FACT: Timing is important in another sense. It has long been observed that a transplanted culture is less subject to change than the culture in
its country of origin.

QUESTION: If equal opportunity and equal probability of success are used
interchangeably, what does that accomplish?

privilege to describe achievement. More fundamentally, these tactics remove behavior and productivity
from discussions of intergroup economic disparities.

Skills confer benefits, even on those who do not have skills.
But the word “change” is not a blank check for self-indulgence— least of all self-indulgence in the
notion that disparities imply villainy.

Fear:  undoubted unfairness of life chances is a reason to give politicians ever more control of a
nation’s resources and ever more power over our individual lives.

Ex: socialist/ communist countries, and the welfare state.

an individual, a people, or a nation may have some, many or most of the
prerequisites for a given achievement without having any real success
in producing that achievement

 One of these current notions is that lagging groups
require a lowering of existing standards, so that more of their
members can advance via various forms of “affirmative action.” Yet the
fields in which many lagging minorities have had their greatest success— especially sports and entertainment— are fields notorious
for severe competition, in which even star performers whose performances begin to decline are ruthlessly cast aside.

Epidemics were blamed on Jews since they weren't the ones dying. Jews just were more hygenic, and people didn't know that germs caused illnesses.

To take the most extreme case, even if every American man, woman and child had equal individual incomes, that would still leave
substantial inequalities in household incomes, because households that are in the top 20 percent of income recipients today contain millions
more people than households in the bottom 20 percent.

Some have argued from history that major social upheavals have often occurred when social problems were in
fact lessening, but not at a pace comparable to rising expectations.

wave of ghetto riots that swept across the United States in the 1960s began just days after
passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

But, under any movement or set of collective beliefs, being on the side of the angels
can be a dangerous self-indulgence in a heedless willfulness
sometimes called idealism.

This kind of idealism can seduce thinking into feeling, replace realities with preconceptions, and make the overriding goal the victory of some abstract vision, in defiance of reality
